docs/reference/engine/tenant/users.md, before:

---
title: User management
---

## Sign in

For sign in, you need a [login token](overview.md#authorization-tokens). After successful login, you receive a session token for subsequent requests.


#### Example: sign in
```graphql
mutation {
  signIn(email: "admin@example.com", password: "123456", expiration: 3600) {
    ok
    result {
      token
    }
    error {
      code
    }
  }
}
```

:::note
Expiration is automatically extended after each request.
:::

## Sign out

By calling `signOut` mutation, you can invalidate a token associated with current request


#### Example: sign out current session
```graphql
mutation {
  signOut {
    ok
  }
}
```

By setting a parameter `all` to `true`, you invalidate all tokens associated with a current identity. 

#### Example: sign out all sessions
```graphql
mutation {
  signOut(all: true) {
    ok
  }
}
``` 
:::note
Only persons are allowed to sign out. It cannot be called with a permanent API key.
::::

## Invite

Superadmin or a project admin can invite other person to a project. You can also setup [Tenant ACL permissions](/reference/engine/schema/acl.md#tenant-permissions) for other user roles.

```graphql
mutation {
  invite(
    email: "john@doe.com",
    projectSlug: "my-blog",
    memberships: [
      {
        role: "editor",
        variables: [{name: "language", values: ["cs"]}]
      }
    ]
  ) {
    ok
    error {
      code
    }
  }
}
```

When a user with given email already exists in a system, he is just added to a project, otherwise a new user is created and login instructions are sent to given e-mail.

Commit message:

feat: improve user invite section

docs/reference/engine/tenant/users.md, after:

---
title: User management
---

## Sign in

For sign in, you need a [login token](overview.md#authorization-tokens). After successful login, you receive a session token for subsequent requests.


#### Example: sign in
```graphql
mutation {
  signIn(email: "admin@example.com", password: "123456", expiration: 3600) {
    ok
    result {
      token
    }
    error {
      code
    }
  }
}
```

:::note
Expiration is automatically extended after each request.
:::

## Sign out

By calling `signOut` mutation, you can invalidate a token associated with current request


#### Example: sign out current session
```graphql
mutation {
  signOut {
    ok
  }
}
```

By setting a parameter `all` to `true`, you invalidate all tokens associated with a current identity. 

#### Example: sign out all sessions
```graphql
mutation {
  signOut(all: true) {
    ok
  }
}
``` 
:::note
Only persons are allowed to sign out. It cannot be called with a permanent API key.
::::

## Inviting Users to a Project

The `invite` mutation provides a way to add a new member to a specified project within the system.

### Invite permissions

By default, users with the global roles `super_admin` and `project_admin`, along with project-level `admin`, are authorized to issue invitations. However, you can extend this capability to other user roles by configuring [Tenant ACL permissions](/reference/engine/schema/acl.md#tenant-permissions).

#### Example: sending and invitation

```graphql
mutation {
  invite(
    email: "john@doe.com",
    projectSlug: "my-blog",
    memberships: [
      {
        role: "editor",
        variables: [{name: "language", values: ["en}]
      }
    ],
    options: {
        mailVariant: "en_us",  # Optional
        method: RESET_PASSWORD  # Recommended
    }
  ) {
    ok
    error {
      code
    }
  }
}
```

### Existing vs new users

If the specified email address already corresponds to a user in the system, that user will simply be added to the designated project. If the user does not yet exist, a new account will be created, and login instructions will be sent to the provided email address.

### Password handling

By default, the invitation process auto-generates a password and sends it via email. However, it's recommended to set the invite method to `RESET_PASSWORD`. This way, a reset token is sent instead of a generated password. Ensure your [mail templates](./mail-templates.md) are appropriately configured to include the password setup link. Note that the default method will transition to `RESET_PASSWORD` in future updates.

### Customizing Email Templates

You can specify a preferred email template variant by setting the `mailVariant` option, as outlined in the [mail templates](./mail-templates.md) section.
